docs/gateway-lock.md, before:

---
summary: "Gateway lock strategy using POSIX flock and PID file"
read_when:
  - Running or debugging the gateway process
  - Investigating single-instance enforcement
---
# Gateway lock

Last updated: 2025-12-10

## Why
- Ensure only one gateway instance runs per host.
- Survive crashes/SIGKILL without leaving a blocking stale lock.
- Keep the PID visible for observability and manual debugging.

## Mechanism
- Uses a single lock file (default `${os.tmpdir()}/clawdis-gateway.lock`, e.g. `/var/folders/.../clawdis-gateway.lock` on macOS) opened once per process.
- An exclusive, non-blocking POSIX `flock` is taken on the file descriptor. The kernel releases the lock automatically on any process exit, including crashes and SIGKILL.
- The PID is written into the same file after locking; the lock (not file existence) is the source of truth.
- On graceful shutdown, we best-effort unlock, close, and unlink the file to reduce crumbs, but correctness does not rely on cleanup.

## Error surface
- If another instance holds the lock, startup throws `GatewayLockError("another gateway instance is already running")`.
- Unexpected `flock` failures surface as `GatewayLockError("failed to acquire gateway lock: …")`.

## Operational notes
- The lock file may remain on disk after abnormal exits; this is expected and harmless because the kernel lock is gone.
- If you need to inspect, `cat /tmp/clawdis-gateway.lock` shows the last PID. Do not delete the file while a process is running—you would only remove the convenience marker, not the lock itself.

Commit message:

chore(gateway): use ws bind as lock

docs/gateway-lock.md, after:

---
summary: "Gateway singleton guard using the WebSocket listener bind"
read_when:
  - Running or debugging the gateway process
  - Investigating single-instance enforcement
---
# Gateway lock

Last updated: 2025-12-11

## Why
- Ensure only one gateway instance runs per host.
- Survive crashes/SIGKILL without leaving stale lock files.
- Fail fast with a clear error when the control port is already occupied.

## Mechanism
- The gateway binds the WebSocket listener (default `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`) immediately on startup using an exclusive TCP listener.
- If the bind fails with `EADDRINUSE`, startup throws `GatewayLockError("another gateway instance is already listening on ws://127.0.0.1:<port>")`.
- The OS releases the listener automatically on any process exit, including crashes and SIGKILL—no separate lock file or cleanup step is needed.
- On shutdown the gateway closes the WebSocket server and underlying HTTP server to free the port promptly.

## Error surface
- If another process holds the port, startup throws `GatewayLockError("another gateway instance is already listening on ws://127.0.0.1:<port>")`.
- Other bind failures surface as `GatewayLockError("failed to bind gateway socket on ws://127.0.0.1:<port>: …")`.

## Operational notes
- If the port is occupied by *another* process, the error is the same; free the port or choose another with `clawdis gateway --port <port>`.
- The macOS app still maintains its own lightweight PID guard before spawning the gateway; the runtime lock is enforced by the WebSocket bind.
