docs/RELEASING.md, before:

---
summary: "Step-by-step release checklist for npm + macOS app"
read_when:
  - Cutting a new npm release
  - Cutting a new macOS app release
  - Verifying metadata before publishing
---

# Release Checklist (npm + macOS)

Use `pnpm` (Node 22+) from the repo root. Keep the working tree clean before tagging/publishing.

1) **Version & metadata**
- [ ] Bump `package.json` version (e.g., `1.1.0`).
- [ ] Update CLI/version strings: `src/cli/program.ts` and the Baileys user agent in `src/provider-web.ts`.
- [ ] Confirm package metadata (name, description, repository, keywords, license) and `bin` map points to `dist/index.js` for `clawdis`.
- [ ] If dependencies changed, run `pnpm install` so `pnpm-lock.yaml` is current.

2) **Build & artifacts**
- [ ] `pnpm run build` (regenerates `dist/`).
- [ ] Optional: `npm pack --pack-destination /tmp` after the build; inspect the tarball contents and keep it handy for the GitHub release (do **not** commit it).

3) **Changelog & docs**
- [ ] Update `CHANGELOG.md` with user-facing highlights (create the file if missing); keep entries strictly descending by version.
- [ ] Ensure README examples/flags match current CLI behavior (notably new commands or options).

4) **Validation**
- [ ] `pnpm lint`
- [ ] `pnpm test` (or `pnpm test:coverage` if you need coverage output)
- [ ] `pnpm run build` (last sanity check after tests)
- [ ] (Optional) Spot-check the web gateway if your changes affect send/receive paths.

5) **macOS app (Sparkle)**
- [ ] Build + sign the macOS app, then zip it for distribution.
- [ ] Generate the Sparkle signature and update `appcast.xml`.
- [ ] Keep the app zip (and optional dSYM zip) ready to attach to the GitHub release.
- [ ] Follow `docs/mac/release.md` for the exact commands and required env vars.

6) **Publish (npm)**
- [ ] Confirm git status is clean; commit and push as needed.
- [ ] `npm login` (verify 2FA) if needed.
- [ ] `npm publish --access public` (use `--tag beta` for pre-releases).
- [ ] Verify the registry: `npm view clawdis version` and `npx -y clawdis@X.Y.Z --version` (or `--help`).

7) **GitHub release + appcast**
- [ ] Tag and push: `git tag vX.Y.Z && git push origin vX.Y.Z` (or `git push --tags`).
- [ ] Create/refresh the GitHub release for `vX.Y.Z` with **title `clawdis X.Y.Z`** (not just the tag); body should inline the product-facing bullets from the changelog (no bare links) **and must not repeat the title inside the body**.
- [ ] Attach artifacts: `npm pack` tarball (optional), `Clawdis-X.Y.Z.zip`, and `Clawdis-X.Y.Z.dSYM.zip` (if generated).
- [ ] Commit the updated `appcast.xml` and push it (Sparkle feeds from main).
- [ ] From a clean temp directory (no `package.json`), run `npx -y clawdis@X.Y.Z send --help` to confirm install/CLI entrypoints work.
- [ ] Announce/share release notes.

Commit message:

docs: note npm release pitfalls

docs/RELEASING.md, after:

---
summary: "Step-by-step release checklist for npm + macOS app"
read_when:
  - Cutting a new npm release
  - Cutting a new macOS app release
  - Verifying metadata before publishing
---

# Release Checklist (npm + macOS)

Use `pnpm` (Node 22+) from the repo root. Keep the working tree clean before tagging/publishing.

1) **Version & metadata**
- [ ] Bump `package.json` version (e.g., `1.1.0`).
- [ ] Update CLI/version strings: `src/cli/program.ts` and the Baileys user agent in `src/provider-web.ts`.
- [ ] Confirm package metadata (name, description, repository, keywords, license) and `bin` map points to `dist/index.js` for `clawdis`.
- [ ] If dependencies changed, run `pnpm install` so `pnpm-lock.yaml` is current.

2) **Build & artifacts**
- [ ] `pnpm run build` (regenerates `dist/`).
- [ ] Optional: `npm pack --pack-destination /tmp` after the build; inspect the tarball contents and keep it handy for the GitHub release (do **not** commit it).

3) **Changelog & docs**
- [ ] Update `CHANGELOG.md` with user-facing highlights (create the file if missing); keep entries strictly descending by version.
- [ ] Ensure README examples/flags match current CLI behavior (notably new commands or options).

4) **Validation**
- [ ] `pnpm lint`
- [ ] `pnpm test` (or `pnpm test:coverage` if you need coverage output)
- [ ] `pnpm run build` (last sanity check after tests)
- [ ] (Optional) Spot-check the web gateway if your changes affect send/receive paths.

5) **macOS app (Sparkle)**
- [ ] Build + sign the macOS app, then zip it for distribution.
- [ ] Generate the Sparkle signature and update `appcast.xml`.
- [ ] Keep the app zip (and optional dSYM zip) ready to attach to the GitHub release.
- [ ] Follow `docs/mac/release.md` for the exact commands and required env vars.

6) **Publish (npm)**
- [ ] Confirm git status is clean; commit and push as needed.
- [ ] `npm login` (verify 2FA) if needed.
- [ ] `npm publish --access public` (use `--tag beta` for pre-releases).
- [ ] Verify the registry: `npm view clawdis version` and `npx -y clawdis@X.Y.Z --version` (or `--help`).

### Troubleshooting (notes from 2.0.0-beta2 release)
- **npm pack/publish hangs or produces huge tarball**: the macOS app bundle in `dist/Clawdis.app` (and release zips) get swept into the package. Fix by whitelisting publish contents via `package.json` `files` (include dist subdirs, docs, skills; exclude app bundles). Confirm with `npm pack --dry-run` that `dist/Clawdis.app` is not listed.
- **npm auth web loop for dist-tags**: use legacy auth to get an OTP prompt:
  - `NPM_CONFIG_AUTH_TYPE=legacy npm dist-tag add clawdis@X.Y.Z latest`
- **`npx` verification fails with `ECOMPROMISED: Lock compromised`**: retry with a fresh cache:
  - `NPM_CONFIG_CACHE=/tmp/npm-cache-$(date +%s) npx -y clawdis@X.Y.Z --version`
- **Tag needs repointing after a late fix**: force-update and push the tag, then ensure the GitHub release assets still match:
  - `git tag -f vX.Y.Z && git push -f origin vX.Y.Z`

7) **GitHub release + appcast**
- [ ] Tag and push: `git tag vX.Y.Z && git push origin vX.Y.Z` (or `git push --tags`).
- [ ] Create/refresh the GitHub release for `vX.Y.Z` with **title `clawdis X.Y.Z`** (not just the tag); body should inline the product-facing bullets from the changelog (no bare links) **and must not repeat the title inside the body**.
- [ ] Attach artifacts: `npm pack` tarball (optional), `Clawdis-X.Y.Z.zip`, and `Clawdis-X.Y.Z.dSYM.zip` (if generated).
- [ ] Commit the updated `appcast.xml` and push it (Sparkle feeds from main).
- [ ] From a clean temp directory (no `package.json`), run `npx -y clawdis@X.Y.Z send --help` to confirm install/CLI entrypoints work.
- [ ] Announce/share release notes.
