docs/talk.md, before:

---
summary: "Talk mode: continuous speech conversations with ElevenLabs TTS"
read_when:
  - Implementing Talk mode on macOS/iOS/Android
  - Changing voice/TTS/interrupt behavior
---
# Talk Mode

Talk mode is a continuous voice conversation loop:
1) Listen for speech
2) Send transcript to the model (main session, chat.send)
3) Wait for the response
4) Speak it via ElevenLabs

## Behavior (macOS)
- **Always-on overlay** while Talk mode is enabled.
- **Listening → Thinking → Speaking** phase transitions.
- On a **short pause** (silence window), the current transcript is sent.
- Replies are **written to WebChat** (same as typing).
- **Interrupt on speech** (default on): if the user starts talking while the assistant is speaking, we stop playback and note the interruption timestamp for the next prompt.

## Voice directives in replies
The assistant may prefix its reply with a **single JSON line** to control voice:

```json
{"voice":"<voice-id>","once":true}
```

Rules:
- First non-empty line only.
- Unknown keys are ignored.
- `once: true` applies to the current reply only.
- Without `once`, the voice becomes the new default for Talk mode.
- The JSON line is stripped before TTS playback.

Supported keys:
- `voice` / `voice_id` / `voiceId`
- `model` / `model_id` / `modelId`
- `speed`, `rate` (WPM), `stability`, `similarity`, `style`, `speakerBoost`
- `seed`, `normalize`, `lang`, `output_format`, `latency_tier`
- `once`

## Config (clawdis.json)
```json5
{
  "talk": {
    "voiceId": "elevenlabs_voice_id",
    "modelId": "eleven_v3",
    "outputFormat": "mp3_44100_128",
    "apiKey": "elevenlabs_api_key",
    "interruptOnSpeech": true
  }
}
```

Defaults:
- `interruptOnSpeech`: true
- `voiceId`: falls back to `ELEVENLABS_VOICE_ID` / `SAG_VOICE_ID`
- `apiKey`: falls back to `ELEVENLABS_API_KEY` (or gateway shell profile if available)

## macOS UI
- Menu bar toggle: **Talk**
- Config tab: **Talk Mode** group (voice id + interrupt toggle)
- Overlay:
  - **Listening**: cloud pulses with mic level
  - **Thinking**: sinking animation
  - **Speaking**: radiating rings
  - Click cloud: stop speaking
  - Click X: exit Talk mode

## Notes
- Requires Speech + Microphone permissions.
- Uses `chat.send` against session key `main`.
- TTS uses ElevenLabs API with `ELEVENLABS_API_KEY`.

Commit message:

fix: stream elevenlabs tts playback

docs/talk.md, after:

---
summary: "Talk mode: continuous speech conversations with ElevenLabs TTS"
read_when:
  - Implementing Talk mode on macOS/iOS/Android
  - Changing voice/TTS/interrupt behavior
---
# Talk Mode

Talk mode is a continuous voice conversation loop:
1) Listen for speech
2) Send transcript to the model (main session, chat.send)
3) Wait for the response
4) Speak it via ElevenLabs (streaming playback)

## Behavior (macOS)
- **Always-on overlay** while Talk mode is enabled.
- **Listening → Thinking → Speaking** phase transitions.
- On a **short pause** (silence window), the current transcript is sent.
- Replies are **written to WebChat** (same as typing).
- **Interrupt on speech** (default on): if the user starts talking while the assistant is speaking, we stop playback and note the interruption timestamp for the next prompt.

## Voice directives in replies
The assistant may prefix its reply with a **single JSON line** to control voice:

```json
{"voice":"<voice-id>","once":true}
```

Rules:
- First non-empty line only.
- Unknown keys are ignored.
- `once: true` applies to the current reply only.
- Without `once`, the voice becomes the new default for Talk mode.
- The JSON line is stripped before TTS playback.

Supported keys:
- `voice` / `voice_id` / `voiceId`
- `model` / `model_id` / `modelId`
- `speed`, `rate` (WPM), `stability`, `similarity`, `style`, `speakerBoost`
- `seed`, `normalize`, `lang`, `output_format`, `latency_tier`
- `once`

## Config (clawdis.json)
```json5
{
  "talk": {
    "voiceId": "elevenlabs_voice_id",
    "modelId": "eleven_v3",
    "outputFormat": "mp3_44100_128",
    "apiKey": "elevenlabs_api_key",
    "interruptOnSpeech": true
  }
}
```

Defaults:
- `interruptOnSpeech`: true
- `voiceId`: falls back to `ELEVENLABS_VOICE_ID` / `SAG_VOICE_ID` (or first ElevenLabs voice when API key is available)
- `modelId`: defaults to `eleven_v3` when unset
- `apiKey`: falls back to `ELEVENLABS_API_KEY` (or gateway shell profile if available)
- `outputFormat`: defaults to `pcm_44100` on macOS/iOS for faster streaming playback (Android stays on MP3)

## macOS UI
- Menu bar toggle: **Talk**
- Config tab: **Talk Mode** group (voice id + interrupt toggle)
- Overlay:
  - **Listening**: cloud pulses with mic level
  - **Thinking**: sinking animation
  - **Speaking**: radiating rings
  - Click cloud: stop speaking
  - Click X: exit Talk mode

## Notes
- Requires Speech + Microphone permissions.
- Uses `chat.send` against session key `main`.
- TTS uses ElevenLabs streaming API with `ELEVENLABS_API_KEY` and incremental playback on macOS/iOS/Android for lower latency.
- `stability` for `eleven_v3` is validated to `0.0`, `0.5`, or `1.0`; other models accept `0..1`.
- `latency_tier` is validated to `0..4` when set.
